# Hotend

The Hotend, as the name suggests, is part of the 3D printer that heats up and melts the filament being extruded. Today, hotends are generally categorized as either all-metal or PTFE-lined.

It generally has the following components:

- Heat sink

There are other miscellaneous parts like a sock that are not essential for the part function so they will not be discussed.

## Specifications

When comparing hot ends, there are a few details to compare:

|       Name        | Description                                                                      |
| :---------------: | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   Filament size   | Usually either 1.75 mm or 3.00 mm                                                |
|   Construction    | All-metal or PTFE-lined                                                          |
| Temperature Range | Determines which filaments you can print                                         |
|     Flow rate     | Determines how much volume of filament can be extruded in a given time           |
| Number of Nozzles | Although most have one nozzle, some allow more than one in a single heater block |

## Components

### Heat Sink

The heat sink ensures the filament before the heat break stays below the [glass-transition temperature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glass_transition#Transition_temperature_Tg) of the filament. Otherwise, semi-solid filament between the glass-transition and melting temperature will cause the hotend to seize and jam. It is usually air-cooled by a small part fan although some are water-cooled.

### Heater Block

The heater block thermally conducts the heat generated by the heater cartridge to the nozzle and the filament. It also connects with the temperature sensor which measures the hotend temperature; the heater cartridge which heats up the block and the nozzle which has the orifice that the hot filament extrudes out of.

### Heat Break

The heat break is essentially a small thin tube that connects the heat sink and heater block. Heat breaks are either all-metal or PTFE-lined. This is a key differentiating part between all-metal and PTFE-lined hotend. All-metal heat breaks have a 1.75 mm orifice machined inside for the filament to directly go through while PTFE-lined heat breaks have a larger orifice to allow a PTFE tube in the heat zone and directly meet the nozzle.

### Nozzle

The nozzle is at the tip of the hotend where the heated filament extrudes out of. It is threaded into the heater

The nozzle diameter is the size of the orifice, usually ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 mm in diameter. Smaller nozzles are able to print finer details with higher precision but is easier to clog. Larger nozzles can usually reduce print time and is more reliable. The common size is 0.4 mm which provides a good balance between quality and print speed. However, there are also large industrial 3D printers for certain unique applications that may use much larger sizes.

Often, nozzles are made of standard brass which works well for most regular filaments. However, there are other materials like stainless steel and ruby-tipped for more exotic filaments that are abrasive.

Brass nozzles are te most affordable and are good for non-abrasive materials that include:

- PLA
- ABS
- PETG
- Nylon
- TPE/TPU

Stainless steel nozzles are acceptable for light use of abrasive materials while stainless steel and ruby-tipped nozzles are better for longer uses but cost more. Abrasive filaments that require these types of nozzles include:

- NylonX
- Carbon fibre
- Glow-in-the-dark filaments
- Metal filaments
- Wood-filled and ceramic-filled filaments

There are also some nozzles with special coatings that have a similar function but are usually proprietary and much more expensive.

### Heater Cartridge

The heater cartridge, which is essentially a large resistor, heats up the hotend. The power of a cartridge is usually measured by how much power is uses in Watts. Cartridges for 3D printers usually range from 24 W to 50 W although there are other, industrial applications that probably use ones with much higher power or multiple.

### Temperature Sensor

<!-- In the future, this may be moved a dedicated article as temperature sensors are not specific to the hotend. -->

There are mainly three types of temperature sensors used in 3D printers: thermistors, PT100 sensors and thermocouples.

#### Thermistors

Thermistors work with most 3D printer controller boards. They usually work up to 300°C although there are some "high-temperature" thermistors which can work upwards of 450°C. In rare cases, in high-temperature printing (300°C+), one low-temperature and one high-temperature thermistor are used together to measure the extruder temperature in the whole temperature range and ensure accuracy.

#### PT100 Sensors

PT100 sensors, the most popular type of RTD are usually preferable for serious, high-temperature and high-performance printing as they are more accurate than thermistors and capable of sensing even higher temperatures. However, most controller boards require a separate amplifier board for it to understand the PT100 sensor.

#### Thermocouples

Thermocouples can be used but are generally not preferred. For high-performance or high-temperature printing, a PT100 sensor is usually the better option. However, Type K thermocouples, for example, are still capable of measuring temperatures higher than any 3D printer extruder can produce.
